# Data Warehouse on AWS Redshift

## Introduction

A fictional music streaming startup, Sparkify, want to move their processes and data onto the cloud. Their data resides in S3, in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

The goal of this project is to create a Redshift cluster, build an ETL pipeline that extracts the data from S3, stages them in Redshift, and transforms data into a set of dimensional tables for the analytics team to continue finding insights into what songs their users are listening to.

## Databse Schema Design

Data is transferred from the two staging tables in S3 into a star schema (one fact table where each row references data from multiple dimension tables). This schema design facilitates analytical querying, as it denormalizes data according to the particular aspects of the data we want to dig further into. In other words, it's optimized to minimize the number of JOINs required to query the data. 

### Staging Tables

**staging_songs** - subset of real data from the Million Song Dataset. Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. The files are partitioned by the first three letters of each song's track ID. 
- num_songs, artist_id, artist_latitude, artist_longitude, artist_location, artist_name, song_id, title, duration, year

**staging_events** - log files in JSON format generated by an event simulator based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate app activity logs from our imaginary music streaming app based on configuration settings.
- event_id, artist, auth, firstName, gender, itemInSession, lastName, length, level, location, method, page, registration, sessionId, song, status, ts, userAgent, userId

### Fact Table

**songplays** - records in log data associated with song plays i.e. records with page NextSong
- songplay_id, start_time, user_id, level, song_id, artist_id, session_id, location, user_agent

### Dimension Tables

**users** - users in the app
- user_id, first_name, last_name, gender, level

**songs** - songs in music database
- song_id, title, artist_id, year, duration

**artists** - artists in music database
- artist_id, name, location, latitude, longitude

**time** - timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units
- start_time, hour, day, week, month, year, weekday

## Project Structure

The folders and files in this repository are as follows:

- **README.md:** This explanatory Readme file
- **create_tables.py:** Script that drops and creates the tables in Redshift. Running this file resets the tables in preparation for running the ETL scripts.
- **etl.py:** Script that reads the data from the staging tables and loads the data into the tables we created on Redshift.
- **sql_queries.py:** Contains all SQL queries. Is imported by the etl and create_table files.
- **dwh.cfg:** Config file that provides credentials to connect to AWS. 

## How to Run

In order to run this project, a Redshift cluster on AWS is required. 

After cloning the repository and navigating to the root folder:

1. Include the credentials to connect to your Redshift cluster in the `dwh.cfg` file.

2. Create or reset the tables
```
python create_tables.py
```
3. Run the ETL pipeline
```
python etl.py
```
4. You can ensure it ran correctly by querying the data in your Redshift cluster. 